#A Designer in a Developer's World

Having come from a designer's background and transitioning into more of a developer via presentation layer development, I have always had a fondness, or obsession if you will, for making the relationships between developers and designers better. After all, designers are 'right-brained' and developers are 'left-brained', right? 

> *“Creativity can be chaos, analytical problem solving can be boring, it’s when they come together that great design truly takes place.”*

[Are You a Right-Brained or Left-Brained Designer?](http://goo.gl/LodHH)

##Creative Problem Solvers
The very idea that developers are solely right-brainers comes from some antiquated mental manifestation of *'programmers'* of the 50's. Modern developers are extremely creative individuals. Their output may not be paintings, charcoal drawings or Photoshop docs, but their output is no less creative. 

The world of app and web development is a crazy new world creating an amazing array of new problems to solve every day, both technologically and creatively. In this new work space we need individuals who are willing to blur the lines of *left* and *right-brained*. I guess people I like to call *whole-brained*. Are you *whole-brained*? I think you are. 

##This Thing Called Agile
Agile is changing the way we do business and I can't imagine doing it any other way. I did a huge spec doc once. Once. Never to be repeated. I won't go into all the details about how agile works, I just want to focus on the lean agile concept of *just in time*.

It's a great concept. One that has been used in the manufacturing world for years. And when it comes to app development this beats the hell out of the old *waterfall* days. But there is a catch. Even in the manufacturing world, all the materials needed just don't magically appear. These materials need to come from somewhere. So, where does agile really start? With agile app development, this is often a point of contention.  

Smart app/web development teams will either use or create a series of frameworks from which they can bootstrap or springboard new projects. Starting from scratch is time consuming and cumbersome. With design, it's not that simple. Sure there are some template design patterns and inspirational resources out there, and then some really awesome open source icons, artifacts, etc (notice I didn't say clip art, there is no such thing as *good* clip art and you should be ashamed for using it). With a new project any designer worth his or her salt will want to design new interactions, new visual experiences, new elements and artifacts from scratch. Pulling from their inner professional design skills. This is a good thing. If you want your product to be visually compelling, competitive and potentially a game changer, you need this skill. Over time on a project the designer will start to build a catalog of assets that can be used again and again. So while the starting point may be a little different between designers and developers, I think that the goals are very similar. 

But then again, there is this *just in time* principal I was talking about. The concept being, you don't build things till you need them. In a lot of ways this makes perfect sense, but in others, this is very hard to deliver. Many creative teams struggle with what this means to them. 

There are practices that have emerged like *iteration 0* and even at times *iteration -1* (not sure how I feel about that one). The principal problem I feel designers have with concepts like *just in time* is that this is NOT how they have historically worked. Designers have been known to spend days and even weeks locked in a room with themselves and maybe a few other designers, chipping away at the perfect solution. Talking only among themselves, reviewing, tweaking, adjusting and perfecting, all in anticipation of the big unveiling. Screen after screen of the perfect solution. But this has proven to come at a great cost. Costs like time and billable hours are the easy ones, but what about the cost of not involving others on the team? Where was the *business* in this process? What about developers?  

I feel that there can be huge wins in any organization if the design process is broken down into the smaller deliverable chunks. Getting agile and delivering only what is needed at the time that it is needed. As grandma used to say, 
>*"Waste not, want not."*

##The Emergence of the Desi-gineer
New worlds need new people to solve new problems. We as professionals need to evolve into the new roles that our industry demands of us. Combine skills to create something amazing. 

Let's face it, the UI of modern apps is a complicated beast. Where it was typically custom that any app developer would simply assume the role of developing the UI, many shops are waking up to the idea that this is a discipline of it's own. Browsers, platforms, devices and the expanding array of supporting technologies all growing at a mind boggling rate. Performance factors, responsive, adaptive, progressive enhancement, unique problems that require their own special attention. 

So, what is a *desi-gineer*? Front-end devs mainly. Developers like myself who may have come from a design background and found themselves writing code as much as or even more-so than pushing pixels. Developers that typically specialize in HTML and CSS/Sass, get into interaction based JavaScript and typically can go deep in one or two application languages. For years business managers have either been saying or have been told that they need [designers that can code](http://goo.gl/50arY). So for some, they responded to this calling and for others it was simply a manifestation of a job that needed to be done. Best friends of the designers and strong allies to the developers, desi-gineers are well equip to fill a new gap in modern app development.

Desi-gineers fill unique roles in today's changing development environment. For those answering the call, you have a unique opportunity before you. And let's be clear here too, a desi-gineer is not someone who simply kicks out some HTML and CSS. These are people who care deeply about the architecture of these languages, their role in app development, their performance and their overall engineering. Their primary responsibility is to the design team to execute their vision in a comprehensive manner that is easy to follow, maintainable and scalable. But remember the *whole-brained* people I spoke of? Desi-gineers are still designers at heart and they still look to be included in the creative process. They are extremely creative problem solvers, but see solutions in very analytical ways.
 
Many desi-gineers will employ solutions like living style guides and/or documenting standards so that other members on the team who follow will have clear instructions as how to continue UI development. These are important investments to the stability and scalability of the project. This is also very agile. Artifacts and documentation that are *just in time* in accordance with the work being done. 

My advice to the world, if you come across one of these desi-gineers, my suggestion is to hold on tightly. Make sure that you are truly appreciating the value that they will bring to your organization. 

##Design Teams, Your Future is Before You
This is where our story gets interesting. So far we realized that developers are just as creative as designers and we officially acknowledged the existence of the *whole-brained* person. Next we dipped our toes into this thing called *agile* and last we discussed the new role of the desi-gineer. When you put this all together, what does this mean?

In all corners of professional industry there are designers who don't like where the winds of change are blowing. There is a looming aspect of this new world that threatens their way of life. In some ways I sympathize, in others, I say evolve or die. Now there are many designers in the world that I would say that they have nothing to worry about. Your skills are magical, you have talents that are amazing. Your visually creative skills are superior and to you I say, your role in this world is already solidified and your identity as a designer is not being threatened. But I do think that your role in interactive design needs to be rethought. Your skills are best suited for creating and owning the brand. You are needed more in the role of creating the new aesthetics, engineering the very foundation that all future designs will springboard from. It is important that someone hold the line and maintain the core spirit of the design. Basically you are needed the most in creating the new design guide and a key player in documenting the uses of these new design elements. This role is very important. Without it, designs go astray, consistency is lost and the true vision becomes clouded amongst the many forked versions and influx of personal influence.

This new creative leadership role is not a haven for divas. There are no ivory towers and there are no exclusive rights to the visual creative experience. If you feel that your role as a designer is to be the visual benevolent dictator, I am afraid that there is a revolution in your future. You need to look at ways to get more people involved in the creative process, and that does not mean to simply ask them questions or invite them to meetings where you show 'your' designs. It means including them early on and allowing them to provide real input. Allowing others to make creative decisions and not be afraid to do so strengthens bonds between individual and product. Set good standards to be followed, but make sure not to be overbearing. There is nothing more demotivating than being given the illusion to make a decision to have them overturned without reason or understanding why. 

Now that we have established the core leadership of the design team and redefined their role, we now need to invent and deploy a new design team. A new insurgency of designers if you will. A team that will work side-by-side with the developers and desi-gineers in the trenches, in the very moment of the story that is being developed. This new design team will not only create new experiences that will honor the core brand, but also become intimate with the restrictions and limitations of the app development side of the operation. This designer role is all about agile design execution, experience engineering if you will. Their role is to execute the *just in time* deliverables that the desi-gineers and development teams need to complete the body of work assigned. While these entrenched designers are responsible for staying true to the design guidelines of the creative leadership, they are answerable to the development team. Their customer is the development team, not the creative team.

##Story Driven Development, Designers in the Trenches 
> *Human sacrifice, dogs and cats living together... mass hysteria!*

*Dr. Peter Venkman*

We've established a few new and somewhat radical concepts here. These ideas will challenge the very foundation of many development and design shops around the world. Probably the most radical idea is the concept of a distributed design model. Depending on how your design team works today, this may be a hard pill to swallow. Call me crazy, but I see this as a healthy and liberating way of doing work. If your passion is aesthetics, user studies, understandings of emotional interactions, establishing and maintaining the brand, then that is what you should do. If your passions lies more in the execution of resources with the creative freedom to design new interactions with clear understanding of the restrictions and limitations of the environment from which your designs will be executed, then that is what you should so. Neither role is to be frowned on or hailed. Each role is part of a team whose goal is to make awesome experiences for their users. But it is these separation of roles that is needed to make this agile *just in time* world work. 

Let's take a ride on the Trolley to the Neighborhood of Make Believe. Let's imagine that all the pieces are in place, all the managers are on board, and it's time to review some stories on the kanban board. 

Imagine if you will, a team all in a room looking at the backlog of work to be done. It is time to pull over some new stories, review them for deliverables and estimate the effort needed to execute. The story is reviewed by a senior app developer, a desi-gineer and one of those insurgent designers too. There is a clear evaluation as to what is needed and what the level of effort is. 

When it comes to the UI deliverable of the story, the designer and a desi-gineer would be responsible to asses the work. Now, this is where I see things getting very interesting. Depending on the level of the UI work needed this could result in one of three things happening. 

* The designer sketches out new UI/UX options based on the established style guide and works with a desi-gineer or app developer to deliver the new UI/UX
* The desi-gineer executes a new UI/UX at the direction of the insurgent designer
* The developer executes the new UI/UX at the direction of the insurgent designer following patterns set by the designer and the desi-gineer

What you will see here is less time in graphic applications and more time designing in real code. Let's be frank here, with all the experience variations we need to deal with these days, trying to do all the design work in tools like Photoshop disconnected from the developers is an amazing time sink. The review cycles are excruciatingly slow and in today's budget focused and fast paced agile world, we can't afford this luxury of time. The designer's experience of working side-by-side with a desi-gineer or developer to create new experiences in real time on multiple devices in varying formats, is full of so much win, I can't imagine not doing this. Well, I can, but I don't want to.

What we have here is a distribution of design responsibilities across the organization. That's the important part. Design is not a silo. Design is not a single role in the org. Design is a responsibility that can be shared. This is important as I have never seen an org where there are an equal number of designers as there are developers. Think of the increased awesome you will get if you can empower all levels of the development teams to be included in the design process.

##In Conclusion
When it is all said and done, all I am really saying here is, give your designers more autonomy and empower developers throughout the team. Allow them to be more creative in their role and more successful in their career. Trust me, designers and developers alike will embrace this idea with open arms. 

##About the Author
Dale Sande is a maker of things, general do-gooder and vanquisher of evil. Loves the HTMLs, the CSSs (really Sass), the JavaScripts, the Rubies and the Rails. Maker of Style Guides, bridge'r between pixel'maters and code creators. Likes to speak, likes to write. Didn't say I was good at it, but I like to do it.

Current status: [another ui guy](https://twitter.com/anotheruiguy) [@substantial](https://twitter.com/Substantial).